# Chess etiquette

Chess players are usually thought of as being polite and reserved. However, 
aside from the touch-move rule, there is very little in the rules of the game 
regulating acceptable behavior, good sportsmanship.

The statements in this document are more guidelines than rules.

## Guidelines for players

### General principles

One should always play to the best of one's ability, except within the context 
of coaching or testing. A player should do everything he or she can to win that 
is allowed under the rules of the game, and under the rules of the tournament 
when applicable.

However, when it is clear that one has lost, one should resign rather than drag 
the game out to checkmate by the opponent. If the opponent is considered to be 
very good, dragging the game out could be seen as an insult, meaning that the 
player believes that the opponent will make a blunder big enough to put the 
opponent's victory in doubt.

When playing with a clock, it is important to be mindful of not performing 
certain actions on your opponent's time, if the action could be seen as an 
attempt to distract your opponent and waste his or her allotted time to make a 
move. In particular, adjusting pieces should be done on your time, not your 
opponent's time.

### Talking during games

Talking is not allowed during competitive games, except under certain 
circumstances for matters directly related to the progress of the game. In a 
coaching context, the conversation should probably still be limited to matters 
pertinent to the game.

Even in a friendly game, it might be best to limit off-topic conversation, as 
your opponent might think you're trying to cause a distraction.

#### Adjusting pieces

For the most part, pieces on the board should only be moved when being moved, 
captured or promoted. And it's okay if a piece is slightly off-center. But if a 
piece is so off-center that its position is ambiguous, it should be adjusted.

Before adjusting any piece, announce your intention to do so by saying 
"J'adoube," French for "I adjust" (if you don't know how to say it in the 
official language of the tournament, just use the French phrase).

It is important to make these announcements during your own turn, especially in 
a timed game. Making adjustments on your opponent's turn could be construed as 
an attempt to create a distraction.

#### Calling checks

Among beginners, it might be necessary for a player to announce a check, just in 
case the opponent fails to notice it. At any higher level, checks should not be 
announced, even if you believe your opponent is about to make an invalid move 
that ignores the check.

If your opponent does make such an invalid move, then you might say something 
like "You're in check."

And of course among grandmasters, calling checks and checkmates is unnecessary, 
as they know well enough to notice them, and often in advance, so that games 
frequently end well before checkmate is obvious to a beginner.

When a check is checkmate, some players might simply say "check" instead of 
"checkmate." Depending on the skill levels of the players, and the perceived 
skill levels of their opponents, this might be considered condescending.

But it's best to assume that a player calling checkmate just "check" wasn't 
completely certain and wanted to make sure first. After all, it would be far 
more embarrassing to claim checkmate and then the opponent discovers it's merely 
a check.

#### Asking to take a move back

In a coaching context, the student can certainly ask the teacher to take back a 
particularly bad move, and the teacher may or may not approve that request. In a 
friendly game, one player may ask for a take back, and the other player should 
grant that request.

But in a tournament, a valid move can't be taken back. And of course any invalid 
move must be undone and stricken from the record.

#### Calling for an arbiter

Depending on the situation, players should try to resolve disagreements before 
calling an arbiter. On the other hand, the prospect of calling an arbiter should 
not be presented as a threat, nor as an insult implying the opponent is 
dishonest or stupid.

Calling for an arbiter need not always be confrontational. Sometimes it might be 
necessary simply to resolve a material deficiency, such as when an extra queen 
is needed to fulfill a promotion.

FINISH WRITING

#### Offering a draw

It would obviously be bad manners to suggest that your opponent should resign, 
as that clearly comes across as an insult to your opponent's ability. However, 
offering a draw could also be seen as an insult, so one should be careful to 
make that offer only when it's clear that the game is progressing towards a 
point where there is an explicit reason for a draw under the rules (e.g., draw 
by repetition).

When playing with a clock, you must absolutely not offer the draw on your 
opponent's time, as that could be seen as an attempt to distract your opponent.

You may decline an offer to draw either by saying so or by making any valid 
move, or maybe even by adjusting a piece, though that last option might come 
across as disrespectful.

It is entirely up to your discretion whether the move you make after declining 
an offer to draw is or is not the move you would have made if there had been no 
offer to draw made.

If you offer to draw, and your opponent declines, you should continue playing 
the game, not resign nor reiterate the draw offer, and continue playing until 
reaching a more definitive position.

#### Emergencies

It should go without saying that all these rules and guidelines go out the 
window in the event of an emergency, such as an earthquake or other natural 
disaster, or a threat from a person, such as an active shooter.

Then evacuation or sheltering become more important than anything going on in 
any particular game. Whether any particular game can be resumed at a later time 
is something that should be sorted out only after the emergency has abated.

Inventing an emergency is of course both bad manners and poor sportsmanship, and 
potentially a crime.

### Resignation

Although you can technically resign at any point in the game, you should 
generally not resign before the first capture of the game.

At the grandmaster level, players often resign in situations in which players of 
lesser ability can't yet foresee the winner. The perceived ability of your 
opponent should be taken into account when deciding to resign. This is to say 
that if it's very clear to you that your opponent should resign (such as in the 
case of an overwhelming material advantage), you should not assume that it's 
equally clear to your opponent.

You should not resign as your opponent is pondering a move. When playing with a 
clock, you should probably not resign on your opponent's time.

Resign by saying something to the effect of "I concede." Tipping your king over 
is a dramatic flourish best left for movies and TV shows, such as *Queen of 
Katwe* and *The Queen's Gambit*. Plus it can be ambiguous: your opponent could 
claim he tipped his king by accident and it should not count as a resignation.

Another problem with tipping your king is that it could come across as rude, 
almost as rude as flipping the whole board over (which, it should go without 
saying, presents an utter lack of sportsmanship).

After resigning, you should not immediately try to explain why you lost, as that 
might be seen as an attempt to diminish the validity of your opponent's win.

If your opponent resigns, you should accept the resignation without question, 
even if you had plans for some very elegant moves. Something along the lines of 
"good game" is probably the best response.

### One last word about the touch-move rule

It would be rude to repeatedly touch pieces that can't be moved at the moment, 
like any of the rooks at the very beginning of the game, without adjusting them 
within their squares and without announcing one's intention to do that.

However, that kind of behavior is technically within the letter of the rules. 
It's obviously against the spirit of the rules.

## Guidelines for spectators

When watching a chess match live, as in a tournament, spectators should not 
comment on the game in a way that could distract the players.

FINISH WRITING
